Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) is an endocrine disorder that affects women from their childhood years (ages 15 to 44). It impacts an estimated 2.2% to 26.7% of women in this age group. Common symptoms include infertility, irregular menstrual cycle, obesity, excessive production of male hormones, and hirsutism. In many cases, PCOS is diagnosed only after a woman faces symptoms or complications emerge, which often leads to chronic diseases like cardiovascular and diabetic issues. The critical gap lies in the early detection, particularly identifying ovarian follicles when they are still in the size range of 2–9 mm, which can significantly improve health outcomes.

To address the issues, this project proposes a highly accurate follicle detection approach to PCOS diagnosis via ingesting Mask R-CNN, for its ability to detect and segment even the smallest structures in ovary ultrasound images. The model is trained on a large, well-annotated dataset comprising around 3859 ultrasound images of infected and non-infected ovaries. The dataset has been split into test, training, and validation with 772, 2315, and 772 images, respectively. Extensive evaluation using metrics like mAP(mean Average Precision) and IoU(Intersection over Union) confirms its clinical relevance and precision. The model was able to achieve a classification accuracy of 98-100% after using it on test data. This allowed us to start working on the next part of the project, which is segmentation.

Unlike conventional methods that focus on detecting larger cysts or offer only coarse localization, our model aims to excel at identifying cysts at an early stage, well before symptoms escalate into chronic diseases. Our approach will use Mask R-CNN fine segmentation that has achieved significantly better mean average precision and IoU scores, excellent recall, minimal false positives, and real-time detection. It generalizes across various ultrasound scans from different patients and was also better than the baseline CNNs and control methods. This is important because it demonstrates the model's excellent clinical relevance and potential for the true early diagnosis of PCOS with AI.
